04-publishing-with-github.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Publishing using Github
subtitle: Show us your art! 
minutes: 20
---

> ## Learning Objectives {.objectives}
>
> * Hosting your page on Github

The next thing we want to do is show the world what we've made! 
There are different ways to go about this. One of the easiest ones
is provided by [Github](https://github.com). 

You should all have signed up for a Github account. If you haven't, now is the time! 

As you might remember, Github is a version control software that is used to track 
changes in text documents. This alone makes it perfect for hosting our code and 
enables us to travel back in time and undo errors that we might introduce. 

On Github you can create so-called repositories in your folders. This folder and its 
subfolders are then tracked and Github tells you immediately if and what has changed 
in the files that are contained within the repository. 
You can 'commit' to a change you made and synchronize your local folder with 
the one that is hosted on Github. 

But what's even better is that Github gives us the possibility to turn 
every repository into a website. 

First, let's create our new repository:

* Click on your face (upper right corner)
* Go to the 'Repository' tab
* Click 'Add a new repository'
* Name it 'myartwork', and click 'Create repository'

Don't worry about the other options for now.

* Click 'Set up in Desktop'. 

Your computer should now be cloning the (still empty) repository to the location of your choice.
Copy the file that contains your artwork into this folder and call it 'index.html'.
The reason for this is that 'index.html' is the default location that is shown. 

Save the file, commit to the change using your Github program, and push the changes 
to your repository ('Publish' button in the GUI).

Right now, our code is on the web, but we haven't told the Github to publish it yet. 
To do this, we create a branch called 'gh-pages'.

* To create this branch, navigate to your repository and click on where it says "branch:master" first (...and then some more things??...). You will find your webpage at www.username.github.io/repositoryname. From now on, remember to only commit to your gh-pages branch. Otherwise changes will not show up.

> ## Show us your art work! {.challenge}
>
> Publish your art work and send us a link. It should be www.username.github.io/myartwork/index.html

Commit message:

Fixed some mistakes, removed duplicated sections in the JSON lesson, and tidied up the Github publishing lesson to not be tied to a particular client.

04-publishing-with-github.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Publishing using Github
subtitle: Show us your art! 
minutes: 20
---

> ## Learning Objectives {.objectives}
>
> * Hosting your page on Github

The next thing we want to do is show the world what we've made! 
There are different ways to go about this. One of the easiest ones
is provided by [Github](https://github.com). 

You should all have signed up for a Github account. If you haven't, now is the time! 

As you might remember, Github uses git, which is a version control software that is used to 
track changes in text documents. This alone makes it perfect for hosting our code and 
enables us to travel back in time and undo errors that we might introduce. 

Using git you can create so-called repositories in your folders. The folder and its 
subfolders are then tracked and git tells you immediately if and what has changed 
in the files that are contained within the repository. You can 'commit' to a change 
you made and synchronize your local repository with the one that is hosted on Github. 

But what's even better is that Github gives us the possibility to turn 
every repository into a website. 

First, let's create our new repository on Github:

* Sign in to Github (https://github.com)
* Create a new repository and call it 'myartwork'

Don't worry about the other options for now. Using git in the command line, the Github app for Windows and Mac OS X, or Sourcetree (https://www.sourcetreeapp.com/), clone this repository to get a local copy. 
Copy the file that contains your artwork into your local repository and call it 'index.html'.
The reason for this is that 'index.html' is the default file that is loaded on the server. 

Save the file, commit the change, and push the changes to the repository on Github.

Right now, our code is on the web, but we haven't told the Github to publish it yet. 
To do this, we create a branch called 'gh-pages'. To create this branch, navigate to your repository and click on where it says "branch:master". An input field should appear. Type in 'gh-pages' and press enter. A new branch should have been created and you should be able to find your webpage at: http://username.github.io/myartwork (with your username in place of 'username'). From now on, remember to only commit/push to your gh-pages branch. Otherwise your changes will not show up.

> ## Show us your art work! {.challenge}
>
> Publish your art work and send us a link. It should be http://username.github.io/myartwork
