CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

Software Carpentry is an open source project,
and we welcome contributions of all kinds:
new lessons,
fixes to existing material,
bug reports,
and reviews of proposed changes are all equally welcome.

By contributing,
you are agreeing that Software Carpentry may redistribute your work under
[these licenses][license].
You also agree to abide by our
[contributor code of conduct][conduct].

## Getting Started

1.  We use GitHub flow to manage changes,
    which is explained in the chapter [Contributing to a Project][pro-git-chapter]
    in Scott Chacon's book *Pro Git*.

2.  For our lessons,
    you should branch from and submit pull requests against the `gh-pages` branch.

3.  When editing lesson pages, you need only commit changes to the Markdown source files.

4.  If you're looking for things to work on,
    please see [the list of issues for this repository][issues],
    or for [our other lessons][swc-lessons].
    Comments on issues and reviews of pull requests are equally welcome.

## Other Resources

1.  This lesson is based on the template found at
    [https://github.com/swcarpentry/lesson-template](https://github.com/swcarpentry/lesson-template).
    That repository has instructions on formatting and previewing lessons.

2.  For a list of helpful commands run `make` in this directory.

[conduct]: CONDUCT.md
[issues]: https://github.com/swcarpentry/lesson-template/issues
[license]: LICENSE.md
[pro-git-chapter]: http://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/GitHub-Contributing-to-a-Project
[swc-lessons]: http://software-carpentry.org/lessons.html

Commit message:

explain how to build the lessons
I ran into some problems and found the solutions in
https://github.com/swcarpentry/r-novice-gapminder/issues/7
https://github.com/swcarpentry/lesson-template/issues/299

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

Software Carpentry is an open source project,
and we welcome contributions of all kinds:
new lessons,
fixes to existing material,
bug reports,
and reviews of proposed changes are all equally welcome.

By contributing,
you are agreeing that Software Carpentry may redistribute your work under
[these licenses][license].
You also agree to abide by our
[contributor code of conduct][conduct].

## Getting Started

1.  We use GitHub flow to manage changes,
    which is explained in the chapter [Contributing to a Project][pro-git-chapter]
    in Scott Chacon's book *Pro Git*.

2.  For our lessons,
    you should branch from and submit pull requests against the `gh-pages` branch.

3.  When editing lesson pages, you need only commit changes to the Markdown source files.

4.  If you're looking for things to work on,
    please see [the list of issues for this repository][issues],
    or for [our other lessons][swc-lessons].
    Comments on issues and reviews of pull requests are equally welcome.

5. To build the site from modified Markdown files, please run
   `make preview`.
   You might need to install [pandoc](http://pandoc.org/installing.html) as well as some python modules first:
   `pip install pandocfilters CommonMark==0.5.4`

## Other Resources

1.  This lesson is based on the template found at
    [https://github.com/swcarpentry/lesson-template](https://github.com/swcarpentry/lesson-template).
    That repository has instructions on formatting and previewing lessons.

2.  For a list of helpful commands run `make` in this directory.

[conduct]: CONDUCT.md
[issues]: https://github.com/swcarpentry/lesson-template/issues
[license]: LICENSE.md
[pro-git-chapter]: http://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/GitHub-Contributing-to-a-Project
[swc-lessons]: http://software-carpentry.org/lessons.html
