index.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Visualizing your data on the web using D3
---

Open science should be visible science. And what better
way to make your research visible and accessible than putting it on the 
internet. But no one wants to read endless tables of data. We’d rather
look at graphs, even better, interactive graphs.
And we have probably all created some graphs. But in order to make them 
accessible by many people, we will have to move away from our specialized
software to something everyone can interact with. 

We want to:

* Display our data on a website to increase visibility and accessibility of our research.

Along the way, we will learn:

* how to create our first own web page
* how to change the appearance of certain elements on the page
* how to integrate graphical elements into our page
* how to publish our page 
* how to allow interaction with elements
* ...and what happens to a cat when we feed it?


> ## Prerequisites {.prereq}
>
> * Github account
> * Participation in at least one SWC workshop
> * Familiarity with your favorite text editor (Sublime 2 is a good option)


## Topics

1.  [HTML](lesson1-html.html)
2.  [CSS](lesson2-css.html)
3.  [Images and SVG](lesson3-images-and-svg.html) 
4. 	[Publishing with Github](lesson4-publishing.html)

Commit message:

lesson4-publishing-with-github init
* also added github client as prereq

index.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Visualizing your data on the web using D3
---

Open science should be visible science. And what better
way to make your research visible and accessible than putting it on the 
internet. But no one wants to read endless tables of data. We’d rather
look at graphs, even better, interactive graphs.
And we have probably all created some graphs. But in order to make them 
accessible by many people, we will have to move away from our specialized
software to something everyone can interact with. 

We want to:

* Display our data on a website to increase visibility and accessibility of our research.

Along the way, we will learn:

* how to create our first own web page
* how to change the appearance of certain elements on the page
* how to integrate graphical elements into our page
* how to publish our page 
* how to allow interaction with elements
* ...and what happens to a cat when we feed it?


> ## Prerequisites {.prereq}
>
> * Github account and Github client for your operating system (Windows, Linux, iOS)
> * Participation in at least one SWC workshop
> * Familiarity with your favorite text editor (Sublime 2 is a good option)


## Topics

1.  [HTML](lesson1-html.html)
2.  [CSS](lesson2-css.html)
3.  [Images and SVG](lesson3-images-and-svg.html) 
4. 	[Publishing with Github](lesson4-publishing.html)
